# Identification of Modified Peptides using Machine Learning Classifiers

## Leandro Jumilla, Department of Chemistry, University of Leeds

Defining the site of action of small molecule chemical probes and their molecular targets remains a major challenge in current drug development. Small molecule binding and modification within shotgun proteomic workflows are assessed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). However, the quality of identification depends on the specificity of MS/MS assignment. Thus, these workflows risk incomplete identification of all modified peptides leading to a loss of information. In this study, 7 machine learning approaches were deployed to identify peptides that have been modified, from those which have not, are presented. Within data collection, split and pool synthesis was conducted with three coupling rounds to produce 59 unique peptides. The modification made imitated reactions with lysine residues to form stable sulfonamides by action of sulfonyl fluoride probes. Digitization and merging ensured all peptide spectra were characterized by identical length arrays. While unsupervised data visualisation using t-SNE proved it was possible to separate the peptide data using the modification feature. Upon principal component analysis, 90% of the dataset’s variance could be explained with just 2 principal components. It was also observed that many of the intensity measurements in the first half of the dataset contained most of the positive and negative correlation employed in classification. Model training established that only 2 principal components were the lowest optimal number for each model, except for Naïve Bayes. Impressively, perfect accuracy, F1 score, and ROC-AUC scores were obtained upon scoring evaluation of the logistic regression model. As a result, logistic regression was selected as the chosen model for prediction. Conversely, the decision tree model performed the worst with an ROC-AUC score of 0.500 representing no class separation capacity whatsoever. Eventually, as artificial intelligence evolves, these models are expected to not only improve downstream analysis but have the potential to analyze whole proteomes.
